README.md, before:

# BAIO: LLM-Based Taxonomy Profiling & Open-Set Pathogen Detection

## Overview

BAIO (Bioinformatics AI for Open-set detection) is a cutting-edge metagenomic analysis platform that leverages foundation models for DNA sequence analysis. Unlike traditional reference-based pipelines (e.g., Kraken2, MetaPhlAn), BAIO can detect novel and divergent pathogens through open-set recognition methods, making it crucial for pandemic preparedness and surveillance.

## Key Features

- **Taxonomy Profiling**: Classifies sequencing reads or contigs into known classes (viral families, bacterial groups, host)
- **Open-Set Detection**: Flags sequences that don't fit known classes as "novel/unknown"
- **Sample-Level Reporting**: Aggregates read-level predictions into intuitive reports for surveillance
- **Interpretability**: Visualizes embeddings, attention patterns, and clusters of novel reads
- **End-to-End Pipeline**: FASTQ → Evo2 embeddings → classifier + OOD detection → GUI report (JSON + PDF)

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **React + Vite**: Lightweight single-page UI for uploads, configuration, results, and chat (replaces the legacy Streamlit view)

### Model Runtime
- **PyTorch + Hugging Face Transformers**: Core ML framework
- **Evo2**: Nucleotide model for embeddings
- **Custom Heads**: MLP for taxonomy classification; OOD scores (Max Softmax, Energy, Mahalanobis)

### Bioinformatics Utilities
- **Biopython**: FASTA/FASTQ parsing
- **HDBSCAN**: Clustering novel reads

### Data Processing
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Embedding manipulation
- **Scikit-learn**: Model calibration and evaluation

### DevOps
- **GitHub Actions**: CI/CD pipeline
- **pytest**: Testing framework
- **Conda/Poetry**: Environment management

## Project Structure

```
metaseq-detector/
- api/                  (FastAPI backend)
- frontend/             (React + Vite UI)
- metaseq/              (Core library)
  - dataio.py           FASTA/FASTQ loaders, filters
  - evo2_embed.py       Evo2 embedding wrapper
  - models.py           Classifier heads
  - ood.py              MSP/Energy/Mahalanobis
  - agg.py              Sample-level aggregation
  - cluster.py          HDBSCAN for OOD reads
  - viz.py              Plots: ROC, UMAP, attention
- configs/              YAMLs for experiments
- notebooks/            Exploratory notebooks
- tests/                Pytest unit tests
- runs/                 Saved reports/metrics
- weights/              Trained classifier heads
- examples/             Demo FASTQ/FASTA
- environment.yml
- pyproject.toml
- docs/
  - weekly_report.md
  - design.md           System architecture
  - dataset_card.md     Data sources and splits
```

## Installation



### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- CUDA-compatible GPU (recommended for Evo2 model)

### Option 1: Conda Environment
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/baio.git
cd baio

# Create and activate conda environment
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate baio
```

### Option 2: Python Virtual Environment
If you prefer using Python's built-in virtual environment instead of conda:

#### 1. Create Virtual Environment

**Windows:**
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd baio

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv baio-env

# Alternative if python3 is your command
python3 -m venv baio-env
```

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd baio

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv baio-env
```

#### 2. Activate Virtual Environment
**Windows (Command Prompt):**
```bash
baio-env\Scripts\activate
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```bash
baio-env\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
source baio-env/bin/activate
```

#### 3. Install Dependencies
```bash
# Upgrade pip first
pip install --upgrade pip

# Install project dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

```

#### 4. Verify Installation
```bash
# Check Python version
python --version

# Check installed packages
pip list

# Test Streamlit installation
```

### Option 3: Poetry
```bash
# Clone and install with Poetry
git clone https://github.com/your-org/baio.git
cd baio
poetry install
```

### macOS (Apple Silicon / arm64) Setup Notes

If you are using an Apple Silicon Mac (M1 / M2 / M3), we recommend using
**Miniforge (arm64)** instead of Anaconda. Anaconda (x86) can cause
architecture conflicts when resolving scientific and ML dependencies.

### Recommended Conda Setup (macOS arm64)

1. Install **Miniforge (arm64)**  
   https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge

2. Create and activate the environment:
   ```bash
   mamba env create -f environment.yml
   conda activate baio


## Development Environment Setup

### IDE Configuration

#### Visual Studio Code
1. Open Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`)
2. Select "Python: Select Interpreter"
3. Choose the Python executable from your virtual environment:
   - **Conda**: Usually in `~/miniconda3/envs/baio/bin/python`
   - **venv**: `baio-env/Scripts/python.exe` (Windows) or `baio-env/bin/python` (macOS/Linux)

#### PyCharm
1. Go to File → Settings → Project → Python Interpreter
2. Click gear icon → Add
3. Select "Existing Environment"
4. Browse to your environment's Python executable

#### Jupyter Notebook Integration
```bash
# For conda environment
conda activate baio
conda install ipykernel
python -m ipykernel install --user --name=baio --display-name="BAIO Project"

# For venv environment
source baio-env/bin/activate  # or activate script for Windows
pip install ipykernel
python -m ipykernel install --user --name=baio-env --display-name="BAIO Project"
```

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in your project root for API keys and configuration:
```bash
# .env file
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
HUGGINGFACE_TOKEN=your_hf_token_here
DEBUG=True
STREAMLIT_SERVER_PORT=8501
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0
```

Load environment variables in your Python code:
```python
from dotenv import load_dotenv
import os

load_dotenv()
api_key = os.getenv('OPENAI_API_KEY')
```

### Common Setup Issues & Solutions

#### Issue: `python` command not found
**Solution:** Use `python3` instead of `python`, or ensure Python is in your system PATH.

#### Issue: Permission denied on Windows PowerShell
**Solution:** Run PowerShell as administrator and execute:
```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser
```

#### Issue: `pip` command not found
**Solution:** 
```bash
# Use python -m pip instead
python -m pip install package-name
```

#### Issue: CUDA/GPU Setup Problems
**Solution:** 
```bash
# Check CUDA availability
python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"

# Install CPU-only version if needed
pip install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu
```

#### Issue: Evo2 Model Download Fails
**Solution:**
- Ensure stable internet connection
- Check Hugging Face token permissions
- Use `huggingface-cli login` for authentication

### Daily Development Workflow

1. **Activate Environment:**
   ```bash
   # Conda
   conda activate baio
   
   # venv (Linux/Mac)
   source baio-env/bin/activate
   
   # venv (Windows)
   baio-env\Scripts\activate
   ```

2. **Update Dependencies:**
   ```bash
   # Conda
   conda env update -f environment.yml
   
   # venv
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. **Run Development Servers (API + React UI):**
   ```bash
   # FastAPI backend
   uvicorn api.main:app --reload --port 8080

   # React frontend (uses Vite)
   cd frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev -- --host --port 5173
   ```

4. **Deactivate When Done:**
   ```bash
   # Both conda and venv
   deactivate
   ```

### Dependency Management

#### Adding New Packages

**For Conda:**
```bash
conda activate baio
conda install new-package
conda env export > environment.yml
```

**For venv:**
```bash
source baio-env/bin/activate  # Windows: baio-env\Scripts\activate
pip install new-package
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

**For Poetry:**
```bash
poetry add new-package
```

## Quick Start

### Run FastAPI backend
```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --reload --port 8080
```

### Run React + Vite frontend
```bash
cd frontend
npm install   # first run only
# Set VITE_API_BASE if your API is not on http://localhost:8080
npm run dev -- --host --port 5173
```

Then open http://localhost:5173 to upload sequences, tune thresholds, and chat. (Legacy Streamlit UI commands remain in git history if you still need them.)
## Running BAIO with Docker & Docker Compose

You can run the full BAIO stack - FastAPI backend and React UI - without installing Python locally.

### 1. Prerequisites
* [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) or Docker Engine with Compose v2.
* Git to clone the repository.

### 2. Build and start
```bash
docker compose up --build
```

This starts:
- API at http://localhost:8080 (health at `/health`, classification at `/classify`, chat at `/chat`)
- Frontend at http://localhost:4173 (set `FRONTEND_PORT` if you want a different host port)

### 3. Environment overrides (optional)
- `API_PORT`: host port for FastAPI (default 8080)
- `FRONTEND_PORT`: host port for React UI (default 4173)
- `VITE_API_BASE`: API base URL baked into the frontend at build time (defaults to http://localhost:8080 so the browser can reach the API)
- CUDA vs CPU: Docker defaults to CPU-only PyTorch wheels (`PIP_EXTRA_INDEX_URL=https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu`). Build a separate GPU image/service if you need CUDA.

### Basic Usage
1. Open the React UI at the frontend port and paste/upload FASTA.
2. Configure thresholds (confidence, batch size, novelty sensitivity).
3. Run the classification pipeline.
4. Review classifications, novelty counts, and chat with the built-in assistant.

## Evaluation Metrics

### Closed-Set Taxonomy
- Accuracy, macro-F1
- Per-class Precision/Recall

### Open-Set Detection
- AUROC, AUPR-Out
- FPR@95%TPR

### Sample-Level Analysis
- OSCR matrix
- Confusion across {Known-Correct, Known-Wrong, Unknown-Correct, Unknown-Wrong}

### Performance
- Reads/second processing rate
- Memory footprint

## Development

### Running Tests
```bash
# Activate your environment first
conda activate baio  # or source baio-env/bin/activate

# Run tests
pytest tests/
```

### Code Quality
```bash
# Format code
black metaseq/ app/

# Lint code
flake8 metaseq/ app/

# Type checking
mypy metaseq/ app/
```

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our contributing guidelines and code of conduct.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Set up your development environment (see Installation section)
4. Make your changes and test thoroughly
5. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## Research Applications

BAIO is designed for:
- **Pandemic Preparedness**: Early detection of novel pathogens
- **Metagenomic Surveillance**: Monitoring environmental and clinical samples
- **Research**: Comparative analysis with traditional methods like Kraken2
- **Clinical Diagnostics**: Supporting pathogen identification in complex samples

## Citation

If you use BAIO in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{baio2024,
  title={BAIO: LLM-Based Taxonomy Profiling & Open-Set Pathogen Detection},
  author={Farhan, Tanzim and Hashami, Mustafa and Gujja, Sahana and Burns, Eric and Gaikwad, Manali},
  year={2025},
  url={https://github.com/your-org/baio}
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
## Contributors

- **Mainuddin** - Tech Lead

- **Luis Palmejar** - Developer
- **Kevin Yang** - Developer

## Acknowledgments

- Built on the Evo2 foundation model (Science, 2024)
- Inspired by the need for improved metagenomic surveillance capabilities
- Thanks to the open-source bioinformatics community

## Support

For questions, issues, or contributions, please:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the development team
- Check our documentation in the `docs/` directory

---

**Note**: This is a research prototype. For production use in clinical settings, additional validation and regulatory approval may be required.

Commit message:

Document uvicorn installation and backend startup

README.md, after:

# BAIO: LLM-Based Taxonomy Profiling & Open-Set Pathogen Detection

## Overview

BAIO (Bioinformatics AI for Open-set detection) is a cutting-edge metagenomic analysis platform that leverages foundation models for DNA sequence analysis. Unlike traditional reference-based pipelines (e.g., Kraken2, MetaPhlAn), BAIO can detect novel and divergent pathogens through open-set recognition methods, making it crucial for pandemic preparedness and surveillance.

## Key Features

- **Taxonomy Profiling**: Classifies sequencing reads or contigs into known classes (viral families, bacterial groups, host)
- **Open-Set Detection**: Flags sequences that don't fit known classes as "novel/unknown"
- **Sample-Level Reporting**: Aggregates read-level predictions into intuitive reports for surveillance
- **Interpretability**: Visualizes embeddings, attention patterns, and clusters of novel reads
- **End-to-End Pipeline**: FASTQ → Evo2 embeddings → classifier + OOD detection → GUI report (JSON + PDF)

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **React + Vite**: Lightweight single-page UI for uploads, configuration, results, and chat (replaces the legacy Streamlit view)

### Model Runtime
- **PyTorch + Hugging Face Transformers**: Core ML framework
- **Evo2**: Nucleotide model for embeddings
- **Custom Heads**: MLP for taxonomy classification; OOD scores (Max Softmax, Energy, Mahalanobis)

### Bioinformatics Utilities
- **Biopython**: FASTA/FASTQ parsing
- **HDBSCAN**: Clustering novel reads

### Data Processing
- **NumPy/Pandas**: Embedding manipulation
- **Scikit-learn**: Model calibration and evaluation

### DevOps
- **GitHub Actions**: CI/CD pipeline
- **pytest**: Testing framework
- **Conda/Poetry**: Environment management

## Project Structure

```
metaseq-detector/
- api/                  (FastAPI backend)
- frontend/             (React + Vite UI)
- metaseq/              (Core library)
  - dataio.py           FASTA/FASTQ loaders, filters
  - evo2_embed.py       Evo2 embedding wrapper
  - models.py           Classifier heads
  - ood.py              MSP/Energy/Mahalanobis
  - agg.py              Sample-level aggregation
  - cluster.py          HDBSCAN for OOD reads
  - viz.py              Plots: ROC, UMAP, attention
- configs/              YAMLs for experiments
- notebooks/            Exploratory notebooks
- tests/                Pytest unit tests
- runs/                 Saved reports/metrics
- weights/              Trained classifier heads
- examples/             Demo FASTQ/FASTA
- environment.yml
- pyproject.toml
- docs/
  - weekly_report.md
  - design.md           System architecture
  - dataset_card.md     Data sources and splits
```

## Installation



### Prerequisites
- Python 3.8+
- CUDA-compatible GPU (recommended for Evo2 model)

### Option 1: Conda Environment
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-org/baio.git
cd baio

# Create and activate conda environment
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda activate baio
```

### Option 2: Python Virtual Environment
If you prefer using Python's built-in virtual environment instead of conda:

#### 1. Create Virtual Environment

**Windows:**
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd baio

# Create virtual environment
python -m venv baio-env

# Alternative if python3 is your command
python3 -m venv baio-env
```

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
# Navigate to project directory
cd baio

# Create virtual environment
python3 -m venv baio-env
```

#### 2. Activate Virtual Environment
**Windows (Command Prompt):**
```bash
baio-env\Scripts\activate
```

**Windows (PowerShell):**
```bash
baio-env\Scripts\Activate.ps1
```

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
source baio-env/bin/activate
```

#### 3. Install Dependencies
```bash
# Upgrade pip first
pip install --upgrade pip

# Install project dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt

```

#### 4. Verify Installation
```bash
# Check Python version
python --version

# Check installed packages
pip list

# Test Streamlit installation
```

### Option 3: Poetry
```bash
# Clone and install with Poetry
git clone https://github.com/your-org/baio.git
cd baio
poetry install
```

### macOS (Apple Silicon / arm64) Setup Notes

If you are using an Apple Silicon Mac (M1 / M2 / M3), we recommend using
**Miniforge (arm64)** instead of Anaconda. Anaconda (x86) can cause
architecture conflicts when resolving scientific and ML dependencies.

### Recommended Conda Setup (macOS arm64)

1. Install **Miniforge (arm64)**  
   https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge

2. Create and activate the environment:
   ```bash
   mamba env create -f environment.yml
   conda activate baio


## Development Environment Setup

### IDE Configuration

#### Visual Studio Code
1. Open Command Palette (`Ctrl+Shift+P` or `Cmd+Shift+P`)
2. Select "Python: Select Interpreter"
3. Choose the Python executable from your virtual environment:
   - **Conda**: Usually in `~/miniconda3/envs/baio/bin/python`
   - **venv**: `baio-env/Scripts/python.exe` (Windows) or `baio-env/bin/python` (macOS/Linux)

#### PyCharm
1. Go to File → Settings → Project → Python Interpreter
2. Click gear icon → Add
3. Select "Existing Environment"
4. Browse to your environment's Python executable

#### Jupyter Notebook Integration
```bash
# For conda environment
conda activate baio
conda install ipykernel
python -m ipykernel install --user --name=baio --display-name="BAIO Project"

# For venv environment
source baio-env/bin/activate  # or activate script for Windows
pip install ipykernel
python -m ipykernel install --user --name=baio-env --display-name="BAIO Project"
```

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file in your project root for API keys and configuration:
```bash
# .env file
OPENAI_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
HUGGINGFACE_TOKEN=your_hf_token_here
DEBUG=True
STREAMLIT_SERVER_PORT=8501
CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0
```

Load environment variables in your Python code:
```python
from dotenv import load_dotenv
import os

load_dotenv()
api_key = os.getenv('OPENAI_API_KEY')
```

### Common Setup Issues & Solutions

#### Issue: `python` command not found
**Solution:** Use `python3` instead of `python`, or ensure Python is in your system PATH.

#### Issue: Permission denied on Windows PowerShell
**Solution:** Run PowerShell as administrator and execute:
```powershell
Set-ExecutionPolicy -ExecutionPolicy RemoteSigned -Scope CurrentUser
```

#### Issue: `pip` command not found
**Solution:** 
```bash
# Use python -m pip instead
python -m pip install package-name
```

#### Issue: CUDA/GPU Setup Problems
**Solution:** 
```bash
# Check CUDA availability
python -c "import torch; print(torch.cuda.is_available())"

# Install CPU-only version if needed
pip install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu
```

#### Issue: Evo2 Model Download Fails
**Solution:**
- Ensure stable internet connection
- Check Hugging Face token permissions
- Use `huggingface-cli login` for authentication

### Daily Development Workflow

1. **Activate Environment:**
   ```bash
   # Conda
   conda activate baio
   
   # venv (Linux/Mac)
   source baio-env/bin/activate
   
   # venv (Windows)
   baio-env\Scripts\activate
   ```

2. **Update Dependencies:**
   ```bash
   # Conda
   conda env update -f environment.yml
   
   # venv
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

3. ### Backend (FastAPI)

The BAIO backend is built with FastAPI and runs using **uvicorn**.

#### Install backend dependencies
If you are using Conda:

```bash
conda activate baio
conda install -c conda-forge uvicorn

#If you are using pip:
pip install uvicorn

#Run the backend server
   uvicorn api.main:app --reload --port 8080

   # React frontend (uses Vite)
   cd frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev -- --host --port 5173
   ```

4. **Deactivate When Done:**
   ```bash
   # Both conda and venv
   deactivate
   ```

### Dependency Management

#### Adding New Packages

**For Conda:**
```bash
conda activate baio
conda install new-package
conda env export > environment.yml
```

**For venv:**
```bash
source baio-env/bin/activate  # Windows: baio-env\Scripts\activate
pip install new-package
pip freeze > requirements.txt
```

**For Poetry:**
```bash
poetry add new-package
```

## Quick Start

### Run FastAPI backend
```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --reload --port 8080
```

### Run React + Vite frontend
```bash
cd frontend
npm install   # first run only
# Set VITE_API_BASE if your API is not on http://localhost:8080
npm run dev -- --host --port 5173
```

Then open http://localhost:5173 to upload sequences, tune thresholds, and chat. (Legacy Streamlit UI commands remain in git history if you still need them.)
## Running BAIO with Docker & Docker Compose

You can run the full BAIO stack - FastAPI backend and React UI - without installing Python locally.

### 1. Prerequisites
* [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop) or Docker Engine with Compose v2.
* Git to clone the repository.

### 2. Build and start
```bash
docker compose up --build
```

This starts:
- API at http://localhost:8080 (health at `/health`, classification at `/classify`, chat at `/chat`)
- Frontend at http://localhost:4173 (set `FRONTEND_PORT` if you want a different host port)

### 3. Environment overrides (optional)
- `API_PORT`: host port for FastAPI (default 8080)
- `FRONTEND_PORT`: host port for React UI (default 4173)
- `VITE_API_BASE`: API base URL baked into the frontend at build time (defaults to http://localhost:8080 so the browser can reach the API)
- CUDA vs CPU: Docker defaults to CPU-only PyTorch wheels (`PIP_EXTRA_INDEX_URL=https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu`). Build a separate GPU image/service if you need CUDA.

### Basic Usage
1. Open the React UI at the frontend port and paste/upload FASTA.
2. Configure thresholds (confidence, batch size, novelty sensitivity).
3. Run the classification pipeline.
4. Review classifications, novelty counts, and chat with the built-in assistant.

## Evaluation Metrics

### Closed-Set Taxonomy
- Accuracy, macro-F1
- Per-class Precision/Recall

### Open-Set Detection
- AUROC, AUPR-Out
- FPR@95%TPR

### Sample-Level Analysis
- OSCR matrix
- Confusion across {Known-Correct, Known-Wrong, Unknown-Correct, Unknown-Wrong}

### Performance
- Reads/second processing rate
- Memory footprint

## Development

### Running Tests
```bash
# Activate your environment first
conda activate baio  # or source baio-env/bin/activate

# Run tests
pytest tests/
```

### Code Quality
```bash
# Format code
black metaseq/ app/

# Lint code
flake8 metaseq/ app/

# Type checking
mypy metaseq/ app/
```

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our contributing guidelines and code of conduct.

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Set up your development environment (see Installation section)
4. Make your changes and test thoroughly
5. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
6. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
7. Open a Pull Request

## Research Applications

BAIO is designed for:
- **Pandemic Preparedness**: Early detection of novel pathogens
- **Metagenomic Surveillance**: Monitoring environmental and clinical samples
- **Research**: Comparative analysis with traditional methods like Kraken2
- **Clinical Diagnostics**: Supporting pathogen identification in complex samples

## Citation

If you use BAIO in your research, please cite:

```bibtex
@software{baio2024,
  title={BAIO: LLM-Based Taxonomy Profiling & Open-Set Pathogen Detection},
  author={Farhan, Tanzim and Hashami, Mustafa and Gujja, Sahana and Burns, Eric and Gaikwad, Manali},
  year={2025},
  url={https://github.com/your-org/baio}
}
```

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
## Contributors

- **Mainuddin** - Tech Lead

- **Luis Palmejar** - Developer
- **Kevin Yang** - Developer

## Acknowledgments

- Built on the Evo2 foundation model (Science, 2024)
- Inspired by the need for improved metagenomic surveillance capabilities
- Thanks to the open-source bioinformatics community

## Support

For questions, issues, or contributions, please:
- Open an issue on GitHub
- Contact the development team
- Check our documentation in the `docs/` directory

---

**Note**: This is a research prototype. For production use in clinical settings, additional validation and regulatory approval may be required.
